README.md, before:

**A robust Next.js newsletter `Next.js Weekly` is sponsoring me** 💖
[![NextjsWeekly banner](./assets/next-js-weekly.png)](https://nextjsweekly.com/)

### [Become a sponsor](https://github.com/sponsors/ipikuka) 🚀

If you find **`recma-mdx-html-override`** useful in your projects, consider supporting my work.  
Your sponsorship means a lot 💖

My sponsors are going to be featured here and on [my sponsor wall](https://github.com/sponsors/ipikuka).

A warm thanks 🙌 to [@ErfanEbrahimnia](https://github.com/ErfanEbrahimnia), [@recepkyk](https://github.com/recepkyk), and [@LSeaburg](https://github.com/LSeaburg) for the support!

Thank you for supporting open source! 🙌

# recma-mdx-html-override

[![npm version][badge-npm-version]][url-npm-package]
[![npm downloads][badge-npm-download]][url-npm-package]
[![publish to npm][badge-publish-to-npm]][url-publish-github-actions]
[![code-coverage][badge-codecov]][url-codecov]
[![type-coverage][badge-type-coverage]][url-github-package]
[![typescript][badge-typescript]][url-typescript]
[![license][badge-license]][url-license]

This package is a **[unified][unified]** (**[recma][recma]**) plugin **that allows selected raw HTML elements to be overridden via MDX components**.

**[unified][unified]** is a project that transforms content with abstract syntax trees (ASTs) using the new parser **[micromark][micromark]**. **[recma][recma]** adds support for producing a javascript code by transforming **[esast][esast]** which stands for Ecma Script Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) that is used in production of compiled source for the **[MDX][MDX]**.

## When should I use this?

Use **`recma-mdx-html-override`** when you need **to override specific raw HTML elements in MDX using `MDXComponents`**.

It's easy to override elements created with Markdown syntax—like `![alt](image.png)` for images or `## Heading` for headings in MDX. However, elements written with raw HTML, such as `<img src="image.png" alt="alt">` or `<h2>Heading</h2>`, cannot be overridden in the same way. **`recma-mdx-html-override`** bridges this gap, making it possible to override raw HTML elements just like their Markdown counterparts.

**`recma-mdx-html-override`** visits the ESAST elements and focuses on `Literal`s (those starting with lowercase letters or/and contains hypen) in ESAST to make them overridable via MDXComponents. Basically, **`recma-mdx-html-override`** modifies `Literal` parameters in the `jsx`/`jsxs` call expressions by converting them to **`_components.[literal]`**, ensuring they can be overridden. You can find information about valid JSX identifiers (identifiers, `wrapper` and html tags) that can be passed into MDXComponents and whether they are `Literals` or a `References to an Identifier` in [@mdx-js/mdx documentation](https://mdxjs.com/docs/using-mdx/#components).

If a html raw element is in the content with **markdown ("md") format** and if the plugin pipeline contains **`rehype-raw`**, then the html raw element is already overridable by default via `MDXComponents`. **`recma-mdx-html-override`** is mostly useful for the content in **MDX ("mdx") format**.

## Installation

This package is suitable for ESM only. In Node.js (version 18+), install with npm:

```bash
npm install recma-mdx-html-override
```

or

```bash
yarn add recma-mdx-html-override
```

## Usage

Say we have the following file, `example.mdx`,

```mdx
# Hi

<img src="image.png" alt="picture" />
```

And our module, `example.js`, looks as follows:

```javascript
import { read } from "to-vfile";
import { compile } from "@mdx-js/mdx";
import recmaMdxHtmlOverride from "recma-mdx-html-override";

main();

async function main() {
  const source = await read("example.mdx");

  const compiledSource = await compile(source, {
    recmaPlugins: [[recmaMdxHtmlOverride, {tags: "img"}]],
  });

  return String(compiledSource);
}
```

Now, running `node example.js` produces the `compiled source` like below:

```diff
function _createMdxContent(props) {
  const _components = {
    h1: "h1",
+   img: "img",
    ...props.components
  };
  return _jsxs(_Fragment, {
    children: [_jsx(_components.h1, {
      children: "Hi"
-   }), "\\n", _jsx("img", {
+   }), "\\n", _jsx(_components.img, {
      src: "image.png",
      alt: "picture"
    })]
  });
}
```

This allows the `img` component to be overridden via MDX components: `{ img: (props) => {/* custom rendering */} }`.

## Options

There is one option.

```typescript
export type HtmlOverrideOptions = {
  tags?: string | string[]; // default is undefined
};
```

### Tags

It is a **`string | string[]`** option to specify which HTML elements should be made overridable in MDX.

Altough it is optional, the plugin will be effectless if you don't provide the option. **`recma-mdx-html-override`** makes only the tags defined via `tags` option overridable.

```javascript
use(recmaMdxHtmlOverride, {tags: "video"} as HtmlOverrideOptions);
```

This makes `<video />` elements overridable via MDX components.

## Syntax tree

This plugin modifies only the ESAST (EcmaScript Abstract Syntax Tree) as explained.

## Types

This package is fully typed with [TypeScript][url-typescript]. The plugin options is exported as `HtmlOverrideOptions`.

## Compatibility

This plugin works with `unified` version 6+. It is compatible with `mdx` version 3+.

## Security

Use of **`recma-mdx-html-override`** does not involve user content so there are no openings for cross-site scripting (XSS) attacks.

## My Plugins

I like to contribute the Unified / Remark / MDX ecosystem, so I recommend you to have a look my plugins.

### My Remark Plugins

- [`remark-flexible-code-titles`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/remark-flexible-code-titles)
  – Remark plugin to add titles or/and containers for the code blocks with customizable properties
- [`remark-flexible-containers`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/remark-flexible-containers)
  – Remark plugin to add custom containers with customizable properties in markdown
- [`remark-ins`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/remark-ins)
  – Remark plugin to add `ins` element in markdown
- [`remark-flexible-paragraphs`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/remark-flexible-paragraphs)
  – Remark plugin to add custom paragraphs with customizable properties in markdown
- [`remark-flexible-markers`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/remark-flexible-markers)
  – Remark plugin to add custom `mark` element with customizable properties in markdown
- [`remark-flexible-toc`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/remark-flexible-toc)
  – Remark plugin to expose the table of contents via `vfile.data` or via an option reference
- [`remark-mdx-remove-esm`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/remark-mdx-remove-esm)
  – Remark plugin to remove import and/or export statements (mdxjsEsm)
- [`remark-mdx-remove-expressions`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/remark-mdx-remove-expressions)
  – Remark plugin to remove MDX expressions within curlybraces {} in MDX content

### My Rehype Plugins

- [`rehype-pre-language`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/rehype-pre-language)
  – Rehype plugin to add language information as a property to `pre` element
- [`rehype-highlight-code-lines`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/rehype-highlight-code-lines)
  – Rehype plugin to add line numbers to code blocks and allow highlighting of desired code lines
- [`rehype-code-meta`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/rehype-code-meta)
  – Rehype plugin to copy `code.data.meta` to `code.properties.metastring`
- [`rehype-image-toolkit`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/rehype-image-toolkit)
  – Rehype plugin to enhance Markdown image syntax `![]()` and Markdown/MDX media elements (`<img>`, `<audio>`, `<video>`) by auto-linking bracketed or parenthesized image URLs, wrapping them in `<figure>` with optional captions, unwrapping images/videos/audio from paragraph, parsing directives in title for styling and adding attributes, and dynamically converting images into `<video>` or `<audio>` elements based on file extension.

### My Recma Plugins

- [`recma-mdx-escape-missing-components`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/recma-mdx-escape-missing-components)
  – Recma plugin to set the default value `() => null` for the Components in MDX in case of missing or not provided so as not to throw an error
- [`recma-mdx-change-props`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/recma-mdx-change-props)
  – Recma plugin to change the `props` parameter into the `_props` in the `function _createMdxContent(props) {/* */}` in the compiled source in order to be able to use `{props.foo}` like expressions. It is useful for the `next-mdx-remote` or `next-mdx-remote-client` users in `nextjs` applications.
- [`recma-mdx-change-imports`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/recma-mdx-change-imports)
  – Recma plugin to convert import declarations for assets and media with relative links into variable declarations with string URLs, enabling direct asset URL resolution in compiled MDX.
- [`recma-mdx-import-media`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/recma-mdx-import-media)
  – Recma plugin to turn media relative paths into import declarations for both markdown and html syntax in MDX.
- [`recma-mdx-import-react`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/recma-mdx-import-react)
  – Recma plugin to ensure getting `React` instance from the arguments and to make the runtime props `{React, jsx, jsxs, jsxDev, Fragment}` is available in the dynamically imported components in the compiled source of MDX.
- [`recma-mdx-html-override`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/recma-mdx-html-override)
  – Recma plugin to allow selected raw HTML elements to be overridden via MDX components.
- [`recma-mdx-interpolate`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/recma-mdx-interpolate)
  – Recma plugin to enable interpolation of identifiers wrapped in curly braces within the `alt`, `src`, `href`, and `title` attributes of markdown link and image syntax in MDX.

## License

[MIT License](./LICENSE) © ipikuka

[unified]: https://github.com/unifiedjs/unified
[micromark]: https://github.com/micromark/micromark
[recma]: https://mdxjs.com/docs/extending-mdx/#list-of-plugins
[esast]: https://github.com/syntax-tree/esast
[estree]: https://github.com/estree/estree
[MDX]: https://mdxjs.com/

[badge-npm-version]: https://img.shields.io/npm/v/recma-mdx-html-override
[badge-npm-download]:https://img.shields.io/npm/dt/recma-mdx-html-override
[url-npm-package]: https://www.npmjs.com/package/recma-mdx-html-override
[url-github-package]: https://github.com/ipikuka/recma-mdx-html-override

[badge-license]: https://img.shields.io/github/license/ipikuka/recma-mdx-html-override
[url-license]: https://github.com/ipikuka/recma-mdx-html-override/blob/main/LICENSE

[badge-publish-to-npm]: https://github.com/ipikuka/recma-mdx-html-override/actions/workflows/publish.yml/badge.svg
[url-publish-github-actions]: https://github.com/ipikuka/recma-mdx-html-override/actions/workflows/publish.yml

[badge-typescript]: https://img.shields.io/npm/types/recma-mdx-html-override
[url-typescript]: https://www.typescriptlang.org/

[badge-codecov]: https://codecov.io/gh/ipikuka/recma-mdx-html-override/graph/badge.svg?token=6UIKn4z8lc
[url-codecov]: https://codecov.io/gh/ipikuka/recma-mdx-html-override

[badge-type-coverage]: https://img.shields.io/badge/dynamic/json.svg?label=type-coverage&prefix=%E2%89%A5&suffix=%&query=$.typeCoverage.atLeast&uri=https%3A%2F%2Fraw.githubusercontent.com%2Fipikuka%2Frecma-mdx-html-override%2Fmaster%2Fpackage.json

Commit message:

Add 'My Unist Utils and Plugins' section to README

README.md, after:

**A robust Next.js newsletter `Next.js Weekly` is sponsoring me** 💖
[![NextjsWeekly banner](./assets/next-js-weekly.png)](https://nextjsweekly.com/)

### [Become a sponsor](https://github.com/sponsors/ipikuka) 🚀

If you find **`recma-mdx-html-override`** useful in your projects, consider supporting my work.  
Your sponsorship means a lot 💖

My sponsors are going to be featured here and on [my sponsor wall](https://github.com/sponsors/ipikuka).

A warm thanks 🙌 to [@ErfanEbrahimnia](https://github.com/ErfanEbrahimnia), [@recepkyk](https://github.com/recepkyk), and [@LSeaburg](https://github.com/LSeaburg) for the support!

Thank you for supporting open source! 🙌

# recma-mdx-html-override

[![npm version][badge-npm-version]][url-npm-package]
[![npm downloads][badge-npm-download]][url-npm-package]
[![publish to npm][badge-publish-to-npm]][url-publish-github-actions]
[![code-coverage][badge-codecov]][url-codecov]
[![type-coverage][badge-type-coverage]][url-github-package]
[![typescript][badge-typescript]][url-typescript]
[![license][badge-license]][url-license]

This package is a **[unified][unified]** (**[recma][recma]**) plugin **that allows selected raw HTML elements to be overridden via MDX components**.

**[unified][unified]** is a project that transforms content with abstract syntax trees (ASTs) using the new parser **[micromark][micromark]**. **[recma][recma]** adds support for producing a javascript code by transforming **[esast][esast]** which stands for Ecma Script Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) that is used in production of compiled source for the **[MDX][MDX]**.

## When should I use this?

Use **`recma-mdx-html-override`** when you need **to override specific raw HTML elements in MDX using `MDXComponents`**.

It's easy to override elements created with Markdown syntax—like `![alt](image.png)` for images or `## Heading` for headings in MDX. However, elements written with raw HTML, such as `<img src="image.png" alt="alt">` or `<h2>Heading</h2>`, cannot be overridden in the same way. **`recma-mdx-html-override`** bridges this gap, making it possible to override raw HTML elements just like their Markdown counterparts.

**`recma-mdx-html-override`** visits the ESAST elements and focuses on `Literal`s (those starting with lowercase letters or/and contains hypen) in ESAST to make them overridable via MDXComponents. Basically, **`recma-mdx-html-override`** modifies `Literal` parameters in the `jsx`/`jsxs` call expressions by converting them to **`_components.[literal]`**, ensuring they can be overridden. You can find information about valid JSX identifiers (identifiers, `wrapper` and html tags) that can be passed into MDXComponents and whether they are `Literals` or a `References to an Identifier` in [@mdx-js/mdx documentation](https://mdxjs.com/docs/using-mdx/#components).

If a html raw element is in the content with **markdown ("md") format** and if the plugin pipeline contains **`rehype-raw`**, then the html raw element is already overridable by default via `MDXComponents`. **`recma-mdx-html-override`** is mostly useful for the content in **MDX ("mdx") format**.

## Installation

This package is suitable for ESM only. In Node.js (version 18+), install with npm:

```bash
npm install recma-mdx-html-override
```

or

```bash
yarn add recma-mdx-html-override
```

## Usage

Say we have the following file, `example.mdx`,

```mdx
# Hi

<img src="image.png" alt="picture" />
```

And our module, `example.js`, looks as follows:

```javascript
import { read } from "to-vfile";
import { compile } from "@mdx-js/mdx";
import recmaMdxHtmlOverride from "recma-mdx-html-override";

main();

async function main() {
  const source = await read("example.mdx");

  const compiledSource = await compile(source, {
    recmaPlugins: [[recmaMdxHtmlOverride, {tags: "img"}]],
  });

  return String(compiledSource);
}
```

Now, running `node example.js` produces the `compiled source` like below:

```diff
function _createMdxContent(props) {
  const _components = {
    h1: "h1",
+   img: "img",
    ...props.components
  };
  return _jsxs(_Fragment, {
    children: [_jsx(_components.h1, {
      children: "Hi"
-   }), "\\n", _jsx("img", {
+   }), "\\n", _jsx(_components.img, {
      src: "image.png",
      alt: "picture"
    })]
  });
}
```

This allows the `img` component to be overridden via MDX components: `{ img: (props) => {/* custom rendering */} }`.

## Options

There is one option.

```typescript
export type HtmlOverrideOptions = {
  tags?: string | string[]; // default is undefined
};
```

### Tags

It is a **`string | string[]`** option to specify which HTML elements should be made overridable in MDX.

Altough it is optional, the plugin will be effectless if you don't provide the option. **`recma-mdx-html-override`** makes only the tags defined via `tags` option overridable.

```javascript
use(recmaMdxHtmlOverride, {tags: "video"} as HtmlOverrideOptions);
```

This makes `<video />` elements overridable via MDX components.

## Syntax tree

This plugin modifies only the ESAST (EcmaScript Abstract Syntax Tree) as explained.

## Types

This package is fully typed with [TypeScript][url-typescript]. The plugin options is exported as `HtmlOverrideOptions`.

## Compatibility

This plugin works with `unified` version 6+. It is compatible with `mdx` version 3+.

## Security

Use of **`recma-mdx-html-override`** does not involve user content so there are no openings for cross-site scripting (XSS) attacks.

## My Plugins

I like to contribute the Unified / Remark / MDX ecosystem, so I recommend you to have a look my plugins.

### My Remark Plugins

- [`remark-flexible-code-titles`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/remark-flexible-code-titles)
  – Remark plugin to add titles or/and containers for the code blocks with customizable properties
- [`remark-flexible-containers`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/remark-flexible-containers)
  – Remark plugin to add custom containers with customizable properties in markdown
- [`remark-ins`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/remark-ins)
  – Remark plugin to add `ins` element in markdown
- [`remark-flexible-paragraphs`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/remark-flexible-paragraphs)
  – Remark plugin to add custom paragraphs with customizable properties in markdown
- [`remark-flexible-markers`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/remark-flexible-markers)
  – Remark plugin to add custom `mark` element with customizable properties in markdown
- [`remark-flexible-toc`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/remark-flexible-toc)
  – Remark plugin to expose the table of contents via `vfile.data` or via an option reference
- [`remark-mdx-remove-esm`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/remark-mdx-remove-esm)
  – Remark plugin to remove import and/or export statements (mdxjsEsm)
- [`remark-mdx-remove-expressions`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/remark-mdx-remove-expressions)
  – Remark plugin to remove MDX expressions within curlybraces {} in MDX content

### My Rehype Plugins

- [`rehype-pre-language`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/rehype-pre-language)
  – Rehype plugin to add language information as a property to `pre` element
- [`rehype-highlight-code-lines`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/rehype-highlight-code-lines)
  – Rehype plugin to add line numbers to code blocks and allow highlighting of desired code lines
- [`rehype-code-meta`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/rehype-code-meta)
  – Rehype plugin to copy `code.data.meta` to `code.properties.metastring`
- [`rehype-image-toolkit`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/rehype-image-toolkit)
  – Rehype plugin to enhance Markdown image syntax `![]()` and Markdown/MDX media elements (`<img>`, `<audio>`, `<video>`) by auto-linking bracketed or parenthesized image URLs, wrapping them in `<figure>` with optional captions, unwrapping images/videos/audio from paragraph, parsing directives in title for styling and adding attributes, and dynamically converting images into `<video>` or `<audio>` elements based on file extension.

### My Recma Plugins

- [`recma-mdx-escape-missing-components`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/recma-mdx-escape-missing-components)
  – Recma plugin to set the default value `() => null` for the Components in MDX in case of missing or not provided so as not to throw an error
- [`recma-mdx-change-props`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/recma-mdx-change-props)
  – Recma plugin to change the `props` parameter into the `_props` in the `function _createMdxContent(props) {/* */}` in the compiled source in order to be able to use `{props.foo}` like expressions. It is useful for the `next-mdx-remote` or `next-mdx-remote-client` users in `nextjs` applications.
- [`recma-mdx-change-imports`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/recma-mdx-change-imports)
  – Recma plugin to convert import declarations for assets and media with relative links into variable declarations with string URLs, enabling direct asset URL resolution in compiled MDX.
- [`recma-mdx-import-media`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/recma-mdx-import-media)
  – Recma plugin to turn media relative paths into import declarations for both markdown and html syntax in MDX.
- [`recma-mdx-import-react`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/recma-mdx-import-react)
  – Recma plugin to ensure getting `React` instance from the arguments and to make the runtime props `{React, jsx, jsxs, jsxDev, Fragment}` is available in the dynamically imported components in the compiled source of MDX.
- [`recma-mdx-html-override`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/recma-mdx-html-override)
  – Recma plugin to allow selected raw HTML elements to be overridden via MDX components.
- [`recma-mdx-interpolate`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/recma-mdx-interpolate)
  – Recma plugin to enable interpolation of identifiers wrapped in curly braces within the `alt`, `src`, `href`, and `title` attributes of markdown link and image syntax in MDX.

### My Unist Utils and Plugins

I also build low-level utilities and plugins for the Unist ecosystem that can be used across Remark, Rehype, Recma, and other syntax trees.

- [`unist-util-find-between-all`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/unist-util-find-between-all)
  – Unist utility to find the nodes between two nodes.
- [`unist-plugin-log-tree`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/unist-plugin-log-tree)
  – Debugging plugin for the unified ecosystem that logs abstract syntax trees (ASTs) without transforming.

## License

[MIT License](./LICENSE) © ipikuka

[unified]: https://github.com/unifiedjs/unified
[micromark]: https://github.com/micromark/micromark
[recma]: https://mdxjs.com/docs/extending-mdx/#list-of-plugins
[esast]: https://github.com/syntax-tree/esast
[estree]: https://github.com/estree/estree
[MDX]: https://mdxjs.com/

[badge-npm-version]: https://img.shields.io/npm/v/recma-mdx-html-override
[badge-npm-download]:https://img.shields.io/npm/dt/recma-mdx-html-override
[url-npm-package]: https://www.npmjs.com/package/recma-mdx-html-override
[url-github-package]: https://github.com/ipikuka/recma-mdx-html-override

[badge-license]: https://img.shields.io/github/license/ipikuka/recma-mdx-html-override
[url-license]: https://github.com/ipikuka/recma-mdx-html-override/blob/main/LICENSE

[badge-publish-to-npm]: https://github.com/ipikuka/recma-mdx-html-override/actions/workflows/publish.yml/badge.svg
[url-publish-github-actions]: https://github.com/ipikuka/recma-mdx-html-override/actions/workflows/publish.yml

[badge-typescript]: https://img.shields.io/npm/types/recma-mdx-html-override
[url-typescript]: https://www.typescriptlang.org/

[badge-codecov]: https://codecov.io/gh/ipikuka/recma-mdx-html-override/graph/badge.svg?token=6UIKn4z8lc
[url-codecov]: https://codecov.io/gh/ipikuka/recma-mdx-html-override

[badge-type-coverage]: https://img.shields.io/badge/dynamic/json.svg?label=type-coverage&prefix=%E2%89%A5&suffix=%&query=$.typeCoverage.atLeast&uri=https%3A%2F%2Fraw.githubusercontent.com%2Fipikuka%2Frecma-mdx-html-override%2Fmaster%2Fpackage.json
